# Configuration

- [Introduction](https://laravel.com/docs/9.x/configuration#introduction)
- [Environment Configuration](https://laravel.com/docs/9.x/configuration#environment-configuration)
  - [Environment Variable Types](https://laravel.com/docs/9.x/configuration#environment-variable-types)
  - [Retrieving Environment Configuration](https://laravel.com/docs/9.x/configuration#retrieving-environment-configuration)
  - [Determining The Current Environment](https://laravel.com/docs/9.x/configuration#determining-the-current-environment)
  - [Encrypting Environment Files](https://laravel.com/docs/9.x/configuration#encrypting-environment-files)
- [Accessing Configuration Values](https://laravel.com/docs/9.x/configuration#accessing-configuration-values)
- [Configuration Caching](https://laravel.com/docs/9.x/configuration#configuration-caching)
- [Debug Mode](https://laravel.com/docs/9.x/configuration#debug-mode)
- [Maintenance Mode](https://laravel.com/docs/9.x/configuration#maintenance-mode)

## Introduction

All of the configuration files for the Laravel framework are stored in the `config` directory. Each option is documented, so feel free to look through the files and get familiar with the options available to you.

These configuration files allow you to configure things like your database connection information, your mail server information, as well as various other core configuration values such as your application timezone and encryption key.

## Application Overview

In a hurry? You can get a quick overview of your application's configuration, drivers, and environment via the `about` Artisan command:

```bash
php artisan about
```

If you're only interested in a particular section of the application overview output, you may filter for that section using the `--only` option:

```bash
php artisan about --only=environment
```

## Environment Configuration

It is often helpful to have different configuration values based on the environment where the application is running. For example, you may wish to use a different cache driver locally than you do on your production server.

To make this a cinch, Laravel utilizes the [DotEnv](https://github.com/vlucas/phpdotenv) PHP library. In a fresh Laravel installation, the root directory of your application will contain a `.env.example` file that defines many common environment variables. During the Laravel installation process, this file will automatically be copied to `.env`.

Laravel's default `.env` file contains some common configuration values that may differ based on whether your application is running locally or on a production web server. These values are then retrieved from various Laravel configuration files within the `config` directory using Laravel's `env` function.

If you are developing with a team, you may wish to continue including a `.env.example` file with your application. By putting placeholder values in the example configuration file, other developers on your team can clearly see which environment variables are needed to run your application.

> Any variable in your `.env` file can be overridden by external environment variables such as server-level or system-level environment variables.

#### Environment File Security

Your `.env` file should not be committed to your application's source control, since each developer / server using your application could require a different environment configuration. Furthermore, this would be a security risk in the event an intruder gains access to your source control repository, since any sensitive credentials would get exposed.

However, it is possible to encrypt your environment file using Laravel's built-in [environment encryption](https://laravel.com/docs/9.x/configuration#encrypting-environment-files). Encrypted environment files may be placed in source control safely.

#### Additional Environment Files

Before loading your application's environment variables, Laravel determines if an `APP_ENV` environment variable has been externally provided or if the `--env` CLI argument has been specified. If so, Laravel will attempt to load an `.env.[APP_ENV]` file if it exists. If it does not exist, the default `.env` file will be loaded.

### Environment Variable Types

All variables in your `.env` files are typically parsed as strings, so some reserved values have been created to allow you to return a wider range of types from the `env()` function:

| `.env` Value | `env()` Value |
| ------------ | ------------- |
| true         | (bool) true   |
| (true)       | (bool) true   |
| false        | (bool) false  |
| (false)      | (bool) false  |
| empty        | (string) ''   |
| (empty)      | (string) ''   |
| null         | (null) null   |
| (null)       | (null) null   |

If you need to define an environment variable with a value that contains spaces, you may do so by enclosing the value in double quotes:

```env
APP_NAME="My Application"
```

### Retrieving Environment Configuration

All of the variables listed in the `.env` file will be loaded into the `$_ENV` PHP super-global when your application receives a request. However, you may use the `env` function to retrieve values from these variables in your configuration files. In fact, if you review the Laravel configuration files, you will notice many of the options are already using this function:

```php
'debug' => env('APP_DEBUG', false),
```

The second value passed to the `env` function is the "default value". This value will be returned if no environment variable exists for the given key.

### Determining The Current Environment

The current application environment is determined via the `APP_ENV` variable from your `.env` file. You may access this value via the `environment` method on the `App` [facade](https://laravel.com/docs/9.x/facades):

```php
use Illuminate\Support\Facades\App;

$environment = App::environment();
```

You may also pass arguments to the `environment` method to determine if the environment matches a given value. The method will return `true` if the environment matches any of the given values:

```php
if (App::environment('local')) {
    // The environment is local
}

if (App::environment(['local', 'staging'])) {
    // The environment is either local OR staging...
}
```

> The current application environment detection can be overridden by defining a server-level `APP_ENV` environment variable.

### Encrypting Environment Files
