# Release Notes

- Versioning Scheme
- Support Policy
- Laravel 9

## Versioning Scheme

Laravel and its other first-party packages follow [Semantic Versioning](https://semver.org/). Major framework releases are released every year (~February), while minor and patch releases may be released as often as every week. Minor and patch releases should never contain breaking changes.

When referencing the Laravel framework or its components from your application or package, you should always use a version constraint such as `^9.0`, since major releases of Laravel do include breaking changes. However, we strive to always ensure you may update to a new major release in one day or less.

### Named Arguments

[Named arguments](https://www.php.net/manual/en/functions.arguments.php#functions.named-arguments) are not covered by Laravel's backwards compatibility guidelines. We may choose to rename function arguments when necessary in order to improve the Laravel codebase. Therefore, using named arguments when calling Laravel methods should be done cautiously and with the understanding that the parameter names may change in the future.

## Support Policy

For all Laravel releases, bug fixes are provided for 18 months and security fixes are provided for 2 years. For all additional libraries, including Lumen, only the latest major release receives bug fixes. In addition, please review the database versions [supported by Laravel](https://laravel.com/docs/9.x/database#introduction).

|Version|PHP(*)|Release|Bug Fixes Until|Security Fixes Until|
|6 LTS|7.2 - 8|September 3rd, 2019|January 25th, 2022|September 6th, 2022|
|7|7.2 - 8.0|March 3rd, 2020|October 6th, 2020|March 3rd, 2021|
|8|7.3 - 8.1|September 8th, 2020|July 26th, 2022|January 24th, 2023|
|9|8.0 - 8.2|February 8th, 2022|August 8th, 2023|February 6th, 2024|
|10|8.1 - 8.3|February 14th, 2023|August 6th, 2024|February 4th, 2025|

End of life Security fixes only
(*) Supported PHP versions

## Laravel 9

As you may know, Laravel transitioned to yearly releases with the release of Laravel 8. Previously, major versions were released every 6 months. This transition is intended to ease the maintenance burden on the community and challenge our development team to ship amazing, powerful new features without introducing breaking changes. Therefore, we have shipped a variety of robust features to Laravel 8 without breaking backwards compatibility, such as parallel testing support, improved Breeze starter kits, HTTP client improvements, and even new Eloquent relationship types such as "has one of many".

Therefore, this commitment to ship great new features during the current release will likely lead to future "major" releases being primarily used for "maintenance" tasks such as upgrading upstream dependencies, which can be seen in these release notes.

Laravel 9 continues the improvements made in Laravel 8.x by introducing support for Symfony 6.0 components, Symfony Mailer, Flysystem 3.0, improved `route:list` output, a Laravel Scout database driver, new Eloquent accessor / mutator syntax, implicit route bindings via Enums, and a variety of other bug fixes and usability improvements.

## PHP 8.0

Laravel 9.x requires a minimum PHP version of 8.0.

## Symfony Mailer

Symfony Mailer support was contributed by [Dries Vints](https://github.com/driesvints), [James Brooks](https://laravel.com/docs/9.x/releases#versioning-scheme), and [Julius Kiekbusch](https://github.com/Jubeki).

Previous releases of Laravel utilized the Swift Mailer library to send outgoing email. However, that library is no longer maintained and has been succeeded by Symfony Mailer.

Please review the [upgrade guide](https://laravel.com/docs/9.x/upgrade#symfony-mailer) to learn more about ensuring your application is compatible with Symfony Mailer.

## Flysystem 3.x

Flysystem 3.x support was contributed by [Dries Vints](https://github.com/driesvints).

Laravel 9.x upgrades our upstream Flysystem dependency to Flysystem 3.x. Flysystem powers all of filesystem interactions offered by the `Storage` facade.

Please review the [upgrade guide](https://laravel.com/docs/9.x/upgrade#flysystem-3) to learn more about ensuring your application is compatible with Flysystem 3.x.

## Improved Eloquent Accessors / Mutators

Improved Eloquent accessors / mutators was contributed by [Taylor Otwell](https://github.com/taylorotwell).

Laravel 9.x offers a new way to define Eloquent accessors and mutators. In previous releases of Laravel, the only way to define [accessors and mutators](https://laravel.com/docs/9.x/eloquent-mutators#accessors-and-mutators) was by defining prefixed methods on your model like so:

```php
public function getNameAttribute($value)
{
    return strtoupper($value);
}
 
public function setNameAttribute($value)
{
    $this->attributes['name'] = $value;
}
```

However, in Laravel 9.x you may define an accessor and mutator using a single, non-prefixed method by type-hinting a return type of `Illuminate\Database\Eloquent\Casts\Attribute`:

```php
use Illuminate\Database\Eloquent\Casts\Attribute;
 
public function name(): Attribute
{
    return new Attribute(
        get: fn ($value) => strtoupper($value),
        set: fn ($value) => $value,
    );
}
```

In addition, this new approach to defining accessors will cache object values that are returned by the attribute, just like [custom cast classes](https://laravel.com/docs/9.x/eloquent-mutators#custom-casts):

```php
use App\Support\Address;
use Illuminate\Database\Eloquent\Casts\Attribute;
 
public function address(): Attribute
{
    return new Attribute(
        get: fn ($value, $attributes) => new Address(
            $attributes['address_line_one'],
            $attributes['address_line_two'],
        ),
        set: fn (Address $value) => [
            'address_line_one' => $value->lineOne,
            'address_line_two' => $value->lineTwo,
        ],
    );
}
```

## Enum Eloquent Attribute Casting

> ### Enum casting is only available for PHP 8.1+.

Enum casting was contributed by [Mohamed Said](https://github.com/themsaid).

Eloquent now allows you to cast your attribute values to PHP ["backed" Enums](https://www.php.net/manual/en/language.enumerations.backed.php). To accomplish this, you may specify the attribute and enum you wish to cast in your model's `$casts` property array:

```php
use App\Enums\ServerStatus;
 
/**
 * The attributes that should be cast.
 *
 * @var array
 */
protected $casts = [
    'status' => ServerStatus::class,
];
```

Once you have defined the cast on your model, the specified attribute will be automatically cast to and from an enum when you interact with the attribute:

```php
if ($server->status == ServerStatus::Provisioned) {
    $server->status = ServerStatus::Ready;
 
    $server->save();
}
```

## Implicit Route Bindings With Enums

Implicit Enum bindings was contributed by [Nuno Maduro](https://github.com/nunomaduro).

PHP 8.1 introduces support for [Enums](https://www.php.net/manual/en/language.enumerations.backed.php). Laravel 9.x introduces the ability to type-hint an Enum on your route definition and Laravel will only invoke the route if that route segment is a valid Enum value in the URI. Otherwise, an HTTP 404 response will be returned automatically. For example, given the following Enum:

```php
enum Category: string
{
    case Fruits = 'fruits';
    case People = 'people';
}
```

You may define a route that will only be invoked if the `{category}` route segment is `fruits` or `people`. Otherwise, an HTTP 404 response will be returned:

```php
Route::get('/categories/{category}', function (Category $category) {
    return $category->value;
});
```

## Forced Scoping Of Route Bindings

Forced scoped bindings was contributed by [Claudio Dekker](https://github.com/claudiodekker).

In previous releases of Laravel, you may wish to scope the second Eloquent model in a route definition such that it must be a child of the previous Eloquent model. For example, consider this route definition that retrieves a blog post by slug for a specific user:

```php
use App\Models\Post;
use App\Models\User;
 
Route::get('/users/{user}/posts/{post:slug}', function (User $user, Post $post) {
    return $post;
});
```

When using a custom keyed implicit binding as a nested route parameter, Laravel will automatically scope the query to retrieve the nested model by its parent using conventions to guess the relationship name on the parent. However, this behavior was only previously supported by Laravel when a custom key was used for the child route binding.

However, in Laravel 9.x, you may now instruct Laravel to scope "child" bindings even when a custom key is not provided. To do so, you may invoke the `scopeBindings` method when defining your route:

```php
use App\Models\Post;
use App\Models\User;
 
Route::get('/users/{user}/posts/{post}', function (User $user, Post $post) {
    return $post;
})->scopeBindings();
```

Or, you may instruct an entire group of route definitions to use scoped bindings:

```php
Route::scopeBindings()->group(function () {
    Route::get('/users/{user}/posts/{post}', function (User $user, Post $post) {
        return $post;
    });
});
```

## Controller Route Groups

Route group improvements were contributed by [Luke Downing](https://github.com/lukeraymonddowning).

You may now use the `controller` method to define the common controller for all of the routes within the group. Then, when defining the routes, you only need to provide the controller method that they invoke:

```php
use App\Http\Controllers\OrderController;
 
Route::controller(OrderController::class)->group(function () {
    Route::get('/orders/{id}', 'show');
    Route::post('/orders', 'store');
});
```

## Full Text Indexes / Where Clauses

Full text indexes and "where" clauses were contributed by [Taylor Otwell](https://github.com/taylorotwell) and [Dries Vints](https://github.com/driesvints).

When using MySQL or PostgreSQL, the `fullText` method may now be added to column definitions to generate full text indexes:

```php
$table->text('bio')->fullText();
```

In addition, the `whereFullText` and `orWhereFullText` methods may be used to add full text "where" clauses to a query for columns that have [full text indexes](https://laravel.com/docs/9.x/migrations#available-index-types). These methods will be transformed into the appropriate SQL for the underlying database system by Laravel. For example, a `MATCH AGAINST` clause will be generated for applications utilizing MySQL:

```php
$users = DB::table('users')
           ->whereFullText('bio', 'web developer')
           ->get();
```

## Laravel Scout Database Engine

The Laravel Scout database engine was contributed by [Taylor Otwell](https://github.com/taylorotwell) and [Dries Vints](https://github.com/driesvints).

If your application interacts with small to medium sized databases or has a light workload, you may now use Scout's "database" engine instead of a dedicated search service such as Algolia or MeiliSearch. The database engine will use "where like" clauses and full text indexes when filtering results from your existing database to determine the applicable search results for your query.

To learn more about the Scout database engine, consult the [Scout documentation](https://laravel.com/docs/9.x/scout).

## Rendering Inline Blade Templates

Rendering inline Blade templates was contributed by [Jason Beggs](https://github.com/jasonlbeggs). Rendering inline Blade components was contributed by [Toby Zerner](https://github.com/tobyzerner).

Sometimes you may need to transform a raw Blade template string into valid HTML. You may accomplish this using the `render` method provided by the `Blade` facade. The `render` method accepts the Blade template string and an optional array of data to provide to the template:

```php
use Illuminate\Support\Facades\Blade;
 
return Blade::render('Hello, {{ $name }}', ['name' => 'Julian Bashir']);
```

Similarly, the `renderComponent` method may be used to render a given class component by passing the component instance to the method:

```php
use App\View\Components\HelloComponent;
 
return Blade::renderComponent(new HelloComponent('Julian Bashir'));
```

## Slot Name Shortcut

Slot name shortcuts were contributed by [Caleb Porzio](https://github.com/calebporzio).

In previous releases of Laravel, slot names were provided using a `name` attribute on the `x-slot` tag:

```php
<x-alert>
    <x-slot name="title">
        Server Error
    </x-slot>
 
    <strong>Whoops!</strong> Something went wrong!
</x-alert>
```

However, beginning in Laravel 9.x, you may specify the slot's name using a convenient, shorter syntax:

```php
<x-slot:title>
    Server Error
</x-slot>
```

## Checked / Selected Blade Directives

Checked and selected Blade directives were contributed by [Ash Allen](https://github.com/ash-jc-allen) and [Taylor Otwell](https://github.com/taylorotwell).

For convenience, you may now use the `@checked` directive to easily indicate if a given HTML checkbox input is "checked". This directive will echo `checked` if the provided condition evaluates to `true`:

```php
<input type="checkbox"
        name="active"
        value="active"
        @checked(old('active', $user->active)) />
```

Likewise, the `@selected` directive may be used to indicate if a given select option should be "selected":

```php
<select name="version">
    @foreach ($product->versions as $version)
        <option value="{{ $version }}" @selected(old('version') == $version)>
            {{ $version }}
        </option>
    @endforeach
</select>
```

## Bootstrap 5 Pagination Views

Bootstrap 5 pagination views were contributed by [Jared Lewis](https://github.com/jrd-lewis).

Laravel now includes pagination views built using [Bootstrap 5](https://getbootstrap.com/). To use these views instead of the default Tailwind views, you may call the paginator's `useBootstrapFive` method within the `boot` method of your `App\Providers\AppServiceProvider` class:

```php
use Illuminate\Pagination\Paginator;
 
/**
 * Bootstrap any application services.
 *
 * @return void
 */
public function boot()
{
    Paginator::useBootstrapFive();
}
```